I think
that one thing that I probably regret
would be not really appreciating
the a black perspective in the early
1960s. And not appreciating it simply because I
was taught the Hmong culture and I was I wasn't
believing that. I didn't have the passion for it. I
really didn't appreciate it. So I guess what I'm
saying is that I regret that I didn't have the
appreciation
that I have now. And really, the genuine
sensitivity, which I thank God for,
really torn
another really minority And we're all minority
people one way or another, somewhere along the
line. And just really caring for people. And I
think when God comes into your life, he gives you
the kind of love. You can care for your brother,
whether he's a darker brother or a lighter
brother. You can care for him. As far as doing
something different, I've got to say... That when
you're dealing with people, let me give you an
example of what I'm talking about. When I went with
my first church in Alabama, it was in Dauphin,
Alabama. It was in 1974.
One of the previous ministers in that church was
there from, say, 1966 to 1968, something like
that. And... He was a graduate of Union
Theological Seminary. It's a liberal seminary in
the Southern Presbyterian Church. And he, this
was right in the height of the Civil Rights
Movement. He had the March of Washington. This guy
stood up in the pulpit for these people from
Southern Alabama. So many of them are from the
rural background. And he declares
in the book that he really shouldn't be in the book.
He really ought to be out there marching in the
streets with the civil rights movement. And that
is really the gospel. And that guy represented the
liberal Christianity.
The gospel is changing social
institutions. His approach was revolutionary.
He grew that church from 130 to 66. What did he
accomplish?
I came in in 1970. I was there until 1977. And we saw
the church grow. We also saw the church grow in a
spiritually in terms of race relationships.
But it was an evolution. We're trying to help
people understand what God is saying in His Word to
people. And what does that say about how you live
your life? So in the sense of taking an
evolutionary approach instead of a
revolutionary
approach, I think that was a good thing. I do not
regret
that at all. Let me mention that.
No, I think that's about
as specific as I can be. How much? How much of an
impact did the Civil Rights Movement have? Well,
let me mention, I think this is interesting. This
concerns a church that I know that was in the PCA,
and this was probably in maybe the early 80s, and
this particular church had adopted in the coming
out of the Civil Rights Movement. They've adopted
post-war monarchy. This was a church that was in
the South. And this church, even in the mid-1970s,
this particular congregation in the South,
had some officers that stood out in front of the
church and turned, and turned backs. And some
people were coming in, because there was all that
people. And the, and this policy continued. Now
that, my understanding is that those people took
some heat. Some of those people, some of those
leaders took some heat from their children, who
were adults.
Wasn't the worst thing. And, I think in the early
1980s, this church went through a review of that
policy. And the thing that's really interesting
about it, just to show you how God can work, the
people that did the review of that were the very
people, some of whom had been involved in
establishing that policy in the very beginning.
And they were some of the very people who had been
around in the mid-1970s. and re-debated
that issue and
turned
away those people of courage. They continued to
hold on to the policy of keeping the border. They
re-studied that issue. They went through kind of a
bondless question and they voted to do away with
that policy. So in
many cases, it's not what you do, but the way you go
about doing it. And God just kind of had prepared.
He kind of worked to prepare. But you see, you've
got certain... certain folks who can't be
patient. It's got to be now. And they want a war, and
there's got to be a revolution. That took, let's
say, that took from 1965 to the early 1990s for that
change to happen. And even then when that changed,
not everybody agreed. But you've got to
understand, the median age So
I think
that to me is an illustration of the best way to
approach
this. Is there anything else that you would like to
say?
Well, I can remember that
on one occasion somebody shared with me a paper
that had been written by a conservative pastor
probably back in the 1960s, in which he was trying
to present a biblical basis
for segregation. And as I sat down and read through
the paper, I was aghast at the incredible
misinterpretation and misuse of the scripture in
order to justify a cultural position. And I can
understand that. I think there's a danger that
whenever we come to the Scriptures that there's a
danger, always the danger, that we will want to
bend the Scripture to our cultural bias instead of
us being directed and corrected by the Scripture.
So I guess that would just be one thing I would say is
that I believe the Scripture is the ultimate thorn
in our life. And that
we need
to constantly and prayerfully work at, in the
process of interpretation,
that we're not trying to make the Scripture fit in
with our own bias. That we really are being
challenged and corrected and directed by the
Scripture in our attitudes and our approach to
culture. There is nothing else, and that finishes
it. Well, Mark, I really appreciate this
opportunity, and I hope that as this gets added to
the growing body of oral tapes and oral history
department at Texas A&M, I hope this will be of help
in terms of scholarship and research for people in
years to come. We surely appreciate it. You're
very welcome.